Dorian's legacy: The slowest, strongest hurricane to ever hit the Bahamas

Doyle Rice
USA TODAY

Dorian was the strongest hurricane on record to strike the Bahamas since records began in 1851.
At least 30 people are reported dead in the Bahamas and the death toll is expected to rise significantly.
Because of the death and destruction caused by Dorian, the storm's name will almost certainly be retired.
As Hurricane Dorian moves away from the United States, it's now certain that the storm's lasting legacy will be its slow, torturous rampage as a Category 5 monster across the Bahamas over the Labor Day weekend, which left dozens dead and unimaginable destruction. 

With sustained winds of 185 mph, Dorian was the strongest hurricane on record to strike the Bahamas since records began in 1851.

It was also the first Category 5 to make landfall on Grand Bahama Island, and at 185 mph was the strongest hurricane on record to hit Abaco Island.

What was even more stunning was its slow path across the Bahamas: According to Colorado State University meteorologist Phil Klotzbach, Dorian tracked only about 25 miles in 24 hours – the shortest distance tracked by an Atlantic major hurricane in a 24-hour period since Hurricane Betsy in 1965.

Weather Underground meteorologist Jeff Masters said that "portions of (Dorian's) eyewall lashed Great Abaco and Grand Bahama islands with Category 5 winds for a total of 22 hours before the great hurricane finally weakened to Category 4 strength.

"In records going back over a century, there are no cases where an Atlantic Category 5 hurricane has impacted a land area for as long as Dorian battered the Bahamas," Masters said.

At least 43 people are reported dead in the Bahamas and the death toll is expected to rise significantly. Property losses in the Bahamas could hit $7 billion.

"We expect (the death toll) to rise," Health Minister Duane Sands said late Friday in a text message to The Associated Press.

Security Minister Marvin Dames said authorities are striving to reach everyone, but the crews can't just bulldoze their way through fallen trees and other rubble because there might be bodies not yet recovered.

"We have been through this before, but not at this level of devastation," Dames said. "These are very serious times and very sensitive times."

The storm also left its mark in the record books in other ways:

As of Friday, with its landfall in North Carolina, Dorian has been a hurricane for a total of nine days. This is longer than most Atlantic storms: Klotzbach said that only about 10% of all Atlantic hurricanes last longer than eight days. 

While this may seem like a lot, it's still a long way from the record of 19.5 days, which was set by Hurricane Ginger in 1971, according to Klotzbach. Ginger took a long and loopy path around the Atlantic before finally making landfall in North Carolina in late September 1971. 

In addition, Dorian has been a named storm for 13 days, which includes its first few days as a tropical storm. That places it in a tie for 5th place for most storm days by an Atlantic hurricane that formed in August, Klotzbach said.

Because of the death and destruction caused by Dorian, the storm's name will almost certainly be retired by the World Meteorological Organization, the United Nations' group that determines which hurricane names will be used in upcoming years. 

A nation hardest hit by a storm can request its name be removed because the storm was so deadly or costly that future use of the name would be insensitive. The names of two of last year's most destructive storms – Florence and Michael – were retired by the WMO earlier this year.